    Learning Morse Code
1. Listen carefully to slow Morse code recordings. You are listening to, in fact, long and short signals (lines and dots, respectively). Long signals sound 3 times longer than short ones. Each letter is separated from the others by a small pause, and the words from each other are longer (also 3 times).
You can search or buy Morse code recordings, or use the shortwave transmitter and try to listen to them live. There are computer training programs that are usually not expensive or even free. They are more effective for training than notes, as they can be used to translate any text into Morse code, which will prevent memorization of one text and help you choose the learning method that is right for you. Never count long and short signals - learn how each letter sounds. If you are using the Farnsworth app, you can adjust the pause between letters so that it sounds slower than the speed of the letter itself. Choose a letter speed just above what you are equal to, and never lower it - only decrease the pause between letters. Morse code is learned in this way - at a speed of 15-25 words per minute or more. The following methods are great when you are learning Morse code without using more than five words per minute, they will force you to drop the wrong ways of learning code and start over.

2. Find a copy of Morse code (such as the one shown at the end of the page). You can use a basic table such as the one shown on the right (click to enlarge) or you can use a more complex one that includes punctuation marks, abbreviations, phrases and codes. Match what you hear with the letters of the alphabet. What word came out? Were you right? Some people find it easier to learn Morse code by writing down points and lines and then comparing them to a table, as shown in the picture; others think that this only slows down the learning process. Do what you like best. If you choose a method that does not involve transcribing the recorded dots and lines, then you can use a pronunciation table that contains the sounds of the Morse code signals the way you hear them.

3. Pronounce. Practice translating simple words and sentences into Morse code. First, you can write down the word, then speak it, but over time, you should try to immediately pronounce the word. For example, the English word "cat".
Write it down: "-.-." ".-" "-", then speak the word (you can use the buttons on your mobile phone or speak with your voice - this is the method that will most likely help you learn Morse code sooner). To pronounce Morse code, you must remember that dit is pronounced with a short “i” and a voiceless “t”. Dah is a short sound. In English, the word "cat" is pronounced as "dah-di-dah-di di-dah dah". Once you're comfortable, pick a children's book and try to translate its text into Morse code, without writing down the letters. Record yourself and play it back afterwards to see how well you did it.
  Don't forget to pause. Each letter should be separated by pauses equal in length to the sound of a dash (i.e., three times longer than the sound of a dot). Each word should be surrounded by pauses, the length of the pauses should be about 7 times the length of the point. The better you practice pause, the easier it will be to understand your code.

4. Start by memorizing the simplest letters. If we talk about the English alphabet, the letter T is denoted as “-”, and the letter E is written as “.”. The letter M is written as “- -”, and I - “. . ”. Gradually move on to letters that require 3-4 dot or dash characters in a row to write. Then start memorizing combinations of dots and lines, from easy to difficult. Leave the most difficult combinations to study last. Fortunately, these include the most rarely used letters (in English, these are Q, Y, X, and V), so once you understand the principle of constructing letters in Morse code, then focus on the most commonly used letters at the beginning. Note that in English, the letters E and T have the shortest form and the letters K, Z, Q, and X have the longest form.

5. Create associations. For example, "p" - "pi-laa-poo-eh, pi-laa-noo-et". Given that there is more than one alphabet in the world, and you are reading this article in Russian, then you are most likely interested in associations that are suitable for the characters of the Russian alphabet. For this reason, we do not provide options for the Latin alphabet in this paragraph. Instead, we advise you to study the article, paying particular attention to the mnemonic shape of each letter. There are mnemonic codes for memorizing Morse code that were invented many years ago; you can buy them or find them on the internet.
If you love music, then try to build associations between Morse code and melodies with which you are familiar. So, Beethoven's symphony No. 5 and its characteristic beginning (da-da-da-daaaa) can stand next to the Latin letter “V” or the Roman numeral “5”. By the way, isn't it a “victorious” melody? During WWII, the BBC started with these 4 notes precisely because of their association with the English word “victory”!

6. Have fun learning. Do you want to attract friends to study? Teach them to blink in Morse code. And if, say, a friend takes you on a bad blind date, then you can miss him “SOS”! Use Morse code to encrypt your secret notes, or keep a diary or even tell dirty jokes so that no one but you and your friends will understand them! Send someone a postcard with Morse code. Confess your love in Morse code (it's very romantic). In general, have fun, do what you like using Morse code for this - and you will learn it much faster.
